You are listening to radio lab radio lash
fromW , n y.
S. E. N. N. P. E. R. Hey, I'm Jad Abumrad. I'm Robert Krulwich.
This is radio lab, the podcast.
And today a story about facing, how would you put it? Uh,
facing your boogeyman. Yeah,
but in this case I literally almost almost,
it comes to us from, Ah, Matt, you ready? Yeah. From reporter Matthew kilty.
Steve, yes. And another guy. How are you doing? I'd never been better. So Matt,
I don't know exactly how we're going to start this story,
but maybe just introduce us to this guy. So this guy's Steve Volk,
he's a reporter, a city reporter here in Philadelphia. I write about ports,
crime, politics,
but the thing that I read was a personal story of Steve's story starts with
Steve and his early twenties and one night he goes to sleep, right?
So I have this dream
where I wake up in my apartment,
there's nobody there but me and I'm just sort of pacing around the rooms and I
feel that sort of that kind of, um,
tremor or buzz almost. It's something bad's about to happen,
feeling when like the walls kind of close in on you a little bit.
I could just feel that something's about to happen.
And I look over at the window and there's this face,
yes,
outside his window.
This man just hovering there and then he sort of recedes back in the dark.
It comes back [inaudible]
and so it sort of Bob up to where I could see it and then recede back into the
distance. And it was very, very, um, threatening.
Yeah. I don't know what's happening. I just think that this,
this person's trying to scare me, intimidate me. So he waits there for a minute
and a moment later, Steve, here's this,
not, oh, you got his front door. He knows immediately it's this guy.
And so I start hollering using every expletive I know, you know,
you're going to, you're going to scare me.
I start daring him to Klinean so I can kill him.
And I have this rage that, uh, you know, I don't,
I don't know that I've ever really felt in real life so much rage that it made
me feel sick. He's just screaming at the door over and over,
come in here so I can kill you. I was really violent. And then all of a sudden
[inaudible]
this guy just kicks open the door and we fly out
we're both swinging and each other.
And then
I wake up literally with my fist,
you know,
it might be hand balled into a fist and I've just thrown a punch at the air and
he's in, he's in an just absolute panic. Very,
very profoundly disturbing dream.
But it's just a tree. Yep.
But the thing about this dream is that it wouldn't go away.
Meaning like anytime there was any sort of anxiety that flared up in his life,
work, deadline, relationship, family troubles back again.
And every time the same thing,
this face that comes up out of the dark face, the window, the door, the fight,
you know, I wanted it to go away. And so this is something, this,
this persistent for how long?
I would say I had this dream at least six times a year for about 20 years.
20 years, 20 years. So he must have had it like hundreds of times. So yeah, I,
it was a dream that I wanted to be done with and I wasn't sure how to be done
with it. But a couple of years ago, Steve Starts working on this book,
basically looking at things that are kind of out there on the edge of science,
but he's looking at him in this objective, investigative way.
And one of the things that he ends up bumping into is a lucid dreaming,
lucid dreaming, lucid dreaming.
So this is where like you wake up inside your dream, like you're awake,
you're got, you're awake, you're present, you're aware,
you can control what's happening in your dream. You, let me just ask you really,
I mean, I've seen inception, I've heard people say that they have lucid dreams,
but I just always assume those people just don't know what they're talking
about, but they're actually referring to something else. Yeah, it seems crazy.
And for a long time, western science denied. Lucid dreaming happened. Yeah.
It didn't exist. But the more Steve looked into it,
he realized that like the science behind this is real. Yeah.
So sell me. We're going to start with this guy, Steven laberge.
Stephen the Birch.
So in the late seventies laberge goes to Stanford and wants to study
consciousness. The reason he does is because he's actually,
he's grown up his entire life claiming to have lucid dreams.
He claims he's been controlling his dreams all his life. Yeah.
But at the same time, he's also a scientist.
He had to find a way to show people objectively that lucid dreaming exists.
Oh wait, hold up. How would you even go about doing that? Because if,
cause if it's a dream, it's only in your head.
So how can you prove something that's only in your head?
So that that actually takes us back to the Bourges advisor.
A guy named William Demand Williams see demand demand,
and he's conducting all of these sleep studies at the Stanford Sleep Science
Center.
And one of the things he noticed is when people go into this dream state with
their eyes behind their eyelids, they begin to just start around like crazy.
They go diagonally sideways.
Basically what we know is rem or rapid. I mean, right.
But one day [inaudible] has this subject and he's watching this guy and this
guy, his eyes, when he, when he goes into rem, out of nowhere,
his eyes go from craziness to this like really slow controlled pattern left to
right, left to right, left to right into men.
I was so intrigued that he immediately went and woke them up and said,
do you remember what you were dreaming? And they said, yeah,
I was watching a ping pong match. But I'm pumped. Right? I mean,
it sounds like a joke. Um, but for Laberge, this is like a total revelation.
I mean, think about it. If,
if you are in a dream and you like wave your hands around and you shout,
you're not moving or anything on me, you know, in the real world.
But if you move your eyes in a dream,
someone's sitting out there and the real world will actually see your eyes move.
They'll see that it's like this little hidden line that you can use to call out
from the dream world to the awake world.
And so Stephen [inaudible] Burj figures. Okay.
What I'm going to do then is have somebody monitor me while I sleep and once,
um, I'm dreaming and become aware that I'm dreaming,
I will issue too smooth,
controlled eye movements. In other words,
I'm going to go to sleep and when I become lucid in my dream, I'm going to move.
Yeah. My eyes left right, left, right.
And then you out here in the real world,
you'll see my eyes actually move left, right, left,
right. And that way you'll know that I am lucid in my dream.
[inaudible] controlling what's going on. It's pretty cool.
So liberty gets all hooked up to the machines and uh,
his assistant sits there watching his eyes go all crazy and then suddenly
instead of Herky jerky movement, his assistant sees smooth,
controlled movements. Left, right, left, right,
left,
right the same pattern they had agreed on exact same pattern and they were sure
that verge was deepest sleep during this pattern making. Yeah. Yeah.
They were watching. They were watching on the, uh,
the EEG machines that he was in a deep sleep when he made that pattern signal.
So he was conscious while he was unconscious is what you're saying? Correct.
He was lucid. Okay. And he was able to repeat this? Yeah, he,
he went on and uh, ended up replicating this with a lot of other people.
He published it. Yeah. He published it like in a journal.
Not In like not just on the web. Yup. Wow.
And you won't find at this stage you won't really find credible dream
researchers denying the reality of lucid dreaming.
So you will find them ignoring it. Routine. Yeah.
Steve gets in touch with laberge who turns out he's doing these workshops now,
teaching people how to have lucid dreams, how to have lucid dreams on command.
This is something you can learn. You can learn how to do this. Yeah.
La Berge has discovered a lot of different techniques for this.
He's got techniques. What are the techniques? So first of all,
to lucid in a dream, you have to realize in the dream that you're dreaming. Yes.
Which is kind of like how do you, how do you do that in a dream? You actually,
what you do is you, you practice in the waking world,
you become hyper aware of certain things that work differently in the dream
world than they do in the waking world. Like what one of the most, uh,
easy for people to follow is, um,
print like text when you're awake. Text is text,
but texting and dream changes really dramatically from moment to moment.
Right now there's a view sonic monitor across from me and when I look away from
it and look back, it still says you sonic. However,
in a dream when you look away from it, because it has no external reality.
When you look back, it could be anything. It could be nuclear launch codes,
it could be poetry.
The point of all this is to zero in on things that make you question,
am I awake or am I dreaming? It's called a state test.
And what ends up happening if you start doing this in real life is you end up
being in a dream.
And because you've asked yourself this question a dozen times that day,
am I awake or am I dreaming that that thought will occur to you in the dream?
And if it does that might,
that might open the door to actually becoming aware,
taking control. Man, you are more than halfway there at that point.
So Stevie started trying all this out, doing all these state tests,
but it wasn't really working.
So he ended up calling the Burj his assistant and I called her and we talked
through different techniques in the book and then we talked about this
nightmare. And when she heard about his nightmare,
she actually suggested a different technique in waking life.
Imagine the dream as it happened and then find the point at which you would like
to gain lucidity. Something happens,
something shifts and this is the point where you'd like to become lucid.
And he decided when the face first appears in the window. That's the moment,
that very specific moment when I want to gain awareness.
And so I would imagine myself doing this over and over face awareness face,
oh awareness. And then one night he goes to sleep.
Um, I'm walking through my apartment, nobody there but me.
And I feel that sort of familiar buzz of anticipation.
Something bad's about to happen and
[inaudible]
into the window and there's the guy just like usual, but this time he says,
I was there.
You're there and then suddenly you're there. Yeah.
It's like my perspective shifts and I am in this body,
in this place, not observing something but in it.
So I could,
you know, my fingers tickling my palms, I could feel my
feet on the floor.
I locked into these feelings because they make the dream more stable.
And I wanted this dream to be stable because this face has been showing up in
this window for 20 years and it's, it does its thing.
It recedes it, it comes back and
I go to the door and I reached for the door and the handle is a door handle.
It feels that real. And I turned it in
[inaudible]
a moment or two later, the guy appears in the Norway
and there is this moment where we look at each other face to face and he's this
total nondescript guy really like any old beer drinking dude.
So he looks at me and he's clearly perplexed because we're not going through our
usual dance, you know, and I kind of backed up to give him room.
Guy Walks in and we're standing there looking at each other.
And I hadn't thought about what I would actually say,
I just, I just thought I'd let him in. What does the Guy Do?
Well, he pulled out a gun
[inaudible]
at this point when he pulls this gun out,
the whole dream in this moment now becomes, for me,
it kind of battle between what I know to be true,
which is that this is a dream and it has no external reality.
And the natural feelings of fear that crop up when somebody who's already been
terrorizing you for 20 years is now
[inaudible].
And he is really carefully looking at me
like waiting for me to go back to my normal reaction.
So he pulls the gun at, uh,
up now and points it at me looking at me like, okay,
now are you going to do what you usually do now? Are you afraid?
And in my head, just like, it's a dream. It's a dream. It's a dream.
It's a dream. And so I just stand there.
Yeah.
And he starts firing
[inaudible]
my first reaction is to look down at myself, right.
To look at my chest and my stomach. And I can see that my,
it's just sort of
billowing with each [inaudible]
that with
each bullet there's, there's no
blood, there is no nothing. I'm not, I'm not hurting.
I am taking this and it's, and it's nothing.
I really feel, and I had this tried at the time on
I am superman,
this guy's firing bullets at me.
[inaudible] I look up at him
and he sort of looks at me
and then he smiles and drops the gun by his side.
And the sensation I had was like, that message was like, see, you got it.
You got it. I'm nothing to be afraid of at all.
And I woke up still feeling like neo still feeling like superman and I have
never had that dream. It's never had it again. It's gone. It's gone,
and a dream is gone.
Well, thank you, Matt.
Sure.
Thanks. Also to Steve Volk has book,
which goes into much more detail on lucid dreaming and many other things.
It's called fringe geology.
This puts me in mind if I have a solution to a problem.
I've had enough for several years, you know,
like me beating up on you and your dreams. I should've just waited it out.
Really? I should've said, yeah, go ahead. Stab me. See,
now I'll never hurt you again. I mean,
this is something that everybody can take home and use tonight. I'm Jad Abumrad.
I'm Robert Krulwich. Thanks for listening.